Learn more about AMD and how aging may increase your risk.
Know what’s natural as you age and what’s not, and learn steps you can try to delay or lessen the changes.
Getting proper nutrition can get harder with age because of loss of appetite or problems with chewing or swallowing food.
With aging comes wisdom, perspective, and yes, changes that may sap your energy.
Nearly half of men and women over the age of 65 say they have at least one sleep problem.
At your annual physical, make sure your doctor performs or recommends these tests that may save your health -- and your life.
Just because you are older than 60, don't think you can't be vital and healthy. But do you know what to do to stay healthy?
In your 30s, you start to lose muscle mass and function. The cause is age-related sarcopenia or sarcopenia with aging.
Does it seem like you get sick more than you did when you were younger? Immunity tends to get weaker with age.
When a family begins to mature, that potential loss of connection is difficult. And it makes communication even more important.
Don’t think that if you’re in the over-50 crowd, you have to settle for a less-than-fulfilling sex life.
If your mother lives in Phoenix and you're in New York, how do you help take care of them?
When you become a caregiver, there may be unexpected costs to giving your loved one the care they need.
Caregiver burnout is a state of physical, emotional, and mental exhaustion.
Assisted living is a type of housing designed for people who need various levels of medical and personal care.
If you plan for end-of-life care, it can bring you peace of mind to know your wishes will be honored.
Your body needs more of certain vitamins and minerals as you hit your 40s and beyond. Find out which ones will benefit you -- and which won’t.
Hearing loss can happen for lots of reasons, from age to medication to an "ear stroke." Learn more about what can cause temporary, permanent, or sudden hearing loss.
Your skin is the largest organ in your body, and everything you eat affects it. These foods do more harm than good and add years to your body inside and out.
Think you know what it’ll be like to get older? Check out these surprising facts from WebMD about your golden years.
You can also search by physician, practice, or hospital name
© 2005 - 2024 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.See additional information.