Some health challenges can come on simply because you get older. Here are five surprising health challenges for your middle years and beyond.
What are the best ways to age with health and happiness? Here are 9 scientific tips.
La disminución de los niveles de testosterona es frecuente en los hombres mayores de 50 años. Infórmate sobre los mejores maneras de aumentar la testosterona y cuándo ver a tu médico.
A pesar del gran número de adultos mayores en las zonas rurales de EE. UU., este grupo tiene menos acceso a un buen cuidado médico.
La falta de conexiones cercanas con otras personas puede aumentar el riesgo de serios problemas de salud en las personas mayores.
The population of rural America skews older than anywhere else in the U.S. Yet the older adults who need health care most have less of it out in the country.
A lack of connection can put older adults at risk of serious health problems. Here’s how to help your loved one stay connected.
For many Hispanics, the health care inequities they face get worse after they turn 50.
Discover ways to encourage your entire family to adopt healthy habits, so you can all enjoy a more fulfilling life after 50.
After age 50, the risk of certain chronic conditions gets higher for Hispanic adults. Regular checkups can help you catch any problems early.
By age 50, you might find that you look at the world differently, and your priorities might shift toward taking care of your health.
You can enjoy a healthier life by getting regular screenings and checkups with your doctor and staying on top of your vaccinations.
Para muchos hispanos, las desigualdades en el cuidado de la salud que ellos enfrentan empeora después de cumplir 50 años. Obtén más información.
Descubre cómo puedes incentivar a tus seres queridos para que adopten nuevos hábitos que les permita a todos disfrutar de una vida más saludable.
El riesgo de ciertas enfermedades aumenta para los adultos hispanos después de los 50 años. Obtén más información sobre cómo mantenerte saludable.
A los 50 años, es posible que veas el mundo desde otra perspectiva y que cambien tus prioridades sobre el cuidado de tu salud. Obtén más información.
Para disfrutar de la buena salud después de los 50 años, mantente al día con las vacunas y con los exámenes médicos. Obtén más información.
¿Te preocupa que un ser querido mayor tenga demencia? Infórmate sobre los primeros indicios.
Cuidar a adultos mayores requiere mucha atención a los detalles. Aprende a protegerlos de los peligros.
Los cuidados paliativos no solo son para el final de la vida. Aprende cómo pueden ayudar a mejorar la salud de los adultos mayores.
Caregiving for older adults requires a lot of attention to detail. Learn how to protect them from harm.
There’s more to palliative care than end-of-life transitions. Learn how palliative care can improve health for older adults.
Concerned that an older loved one is facing dementia? Learn the early warning signs.
Exercise is especially powerful for older people because it can prevent or delay age-related health issues. It’s never too late to start.
Primary care doctors can help those 65 and older with all of their health care needs. Learn how they treat routine illness and manage ongoing conditions like diabetes.
A primary care doctor who knows your health care needs can identify problems early, help manage chronic conditions, and make sure you get all the resources that are available.
If you’re a caregiver for an older adult, there are many things you can do so that you and your loved one both get the best care possible.
Primary care physicians can play a vital role in helping older adults manage chronic and complex health conditions.
The choice between a traditional PCP and a geriatrician usually comes down to the complexity and severity of your health concerns.
¿Quieres vivir una vida larga y satisfecha? Estos 6 secretos, basados en la ciencia, demuestran cómo puedes gozar de una buena salud y mantenerte en forma en la tercera edad.
En comparación con los adultos jóvenes, los mayores necesitan más estudios de diagnóstico y tienen más condiciones de salud. Descubre cómo cambian tus necesidades de salud después de los 70 años y cómo puede ayudarte tu médico.
El enfoque hacia los adultos mayores ha cambiado. Los médicos y enfermeros deben centrarse en las prioridades del paciente, no solo en sus problemas de salud.
Senior centers allow older adults to build community in an engaging setting. Learn more about senior centers, their benefits, and if they might be suitable for you or your loved one.
As your loved one reaches their 70s or 80s, you may see changes in their thinking and behavior. Learn how to meet the challenges and plan for the future.
Apple Watch now offers Fall Detection. Learn how it works, how to set it up, and how accurate it is.
Find out what you need to know about raised toilet seats, and discover if it’s the right piece of equipment for you.
Learn how to navigate life insurance for older people and choose the best plan for you.
Learn about transportation services for older people: when older people should stop driving and what senior transport services can help you or your loved ones.
What are bath and shower chairs, and how can they improve your life? Find out what you need to know to buy the safest bath chair for elderly use.
Find out what you need to know about shower chairs and tub benches. Discover the different types and how to choose the right one.
Find out what you need to know about bedside commodes and their safe use. Learn how to keep them clean and hygienic.
Find out if you have to pay taxes on your Social Security income.
Find out what you need to know about the Otago Exercise Program, including whether or not it may benefit you.
Find out what you need to know about the Stepping On program.
Find out what you need to know about the Older Americans Act and what safeguards it provides.
The Beers Criteria helps your doctor avoid potentially dangerous medicines and combinations. Learn about this tool’s use and being safe when taking medicines.
Find out what you need to know about the medical specialty of gerontology.
Encuentra las respuestas a preguntas comunes sobre la atención en los hogares para personas mayores.
A medida que tu ser querido alcanza los 70 años, es posible que notes cambios en su pensamiento y comportamiento. Aprende cómo enfrentar estos desafíos.



© 2005 - 2024 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.See additional information.