If your mother lives in Phoenix and you're in New York, how do you help take care of them? Angela Heath, director of the Eldercare Locator Hotline of the National Association of Area Agencies on Aging, has compiled 10 strategies to help you cope. This article is adapted from Heath's book,Long-Distance Caregiving: A Survival Guide for Far Away Caregivers.
Get organizedKeep track of important information in a care log.
Identify your informal networkAsk for help from people in the older person's community, such as relatives, neighbors, longtime family friends, and members of religious, civic, and social organizations. Ask them to call youÂ if they spot a problem.
Investigate travel alternativesBe prepared to "care commute." Investigate travel options in advance. Keep your car in good repair, and check on the route and weather before traveling.
If you rent a car, look for the best rates. Don't pay for insurance if you already carry full coverage or your credit card company offers coverage. You may get a discount when buying bus or train tickets if you disclose that it's an emergency. Purchase airline tickets seven days in advance and stay over a Saturday night.
Discuss legal and financial issuesThese topics may be difficult to talk about, but they help ensure that the older person maintains decision-making authority even when incapacitated. Preplanning will also lessen family disagreements and protect family resources.
Take care of necessary paperworkFind all legal, financial, andinsurancedocuments, including birth certificates, social security cards, marriage or divorce decrees, wills, and power of attorney. Identify bank accounts, titles, sources of income and obligations, and auto, life, homeowner's, and medical insurance papers. Review these documents for accuracy and update them if necessary. Store documents in a secure place such as a safe deposit box or a fireproof box. Be safe -- make duplicate copies.
Tap into the aging networkContact the local department on aging in your relative's community. This agency can help you identify helpful services. Use theNational Eldercare Locator Serviceto find local aging agencies.
Develop a plan of careIf possible, bring the family together for a meeting. Decide with the older person what the primary needs are, who can provide assistance and what community resources would help. Summarize your agreement in writing. Keep in mind that family difficulties are typical. You may need to bring in a family therapist or social worker to help.
Adjust your plan of care when necessaryBe aware that your care plan may need to be altered. The older person's needs may change, and helpers will come and go. Use your care log to deal with changes.
Explore relocation issuesPrimary questions are when, who, and where.
Take care of yourselfMaintain good health, make time for yourself, set limits, and allow others to help.
SOURCE:ÂHeath, A.Long-Distance Caregiving: A Survival Guide for Far Away Caregivers, Impact Pub, 1993.



Â© 2005 - 2024 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.See additional information.