With aging comes wisdom, perspective, and yes, changes that may sap your energy. Even if you’re not dancing quite as fast as you once did, there are ways you can keep that bounce in your step.
Focus on:

If you’ve been eating the same things for a while, take a fresh look at what’s on your plate. The right types of food can raise your energy and make you feel better.
As you age, your body’s ability to turn food into energy slows down. As a result, many put onweight. Still, you can help yourself stay fit and energetic.
Sugar levelsplay a big role. Some experts say “low-glycemic” foods, like beans, non-starchy veggies, nuts, and whole-grain products, can help keep yourblood sugarin balance.
“High-glycemic” foods, like white rice, whitebread, andsugar-sweetened drinks, can cause fast spikes in your blood sugar. You may feel a brief energy jolt, but when the dip comes, you may feel more drained than before.
Too few calories can leave your body starved for energy. Too many can make yougain weight, which can make you feel sluggish.
How much you should eat each day depends on several things, especially how active you are. Talk to your doctor or a dietitian about how many calories you need.
You may notice you’reworking outless than you were when you were younger. Perhaps training for 5Ks has given way to after-dinner strolls.
The more active you are, the more energetic you’ll feel. Exercise and physical activity are great ways to help your mood, too. If you have issues that stop you from doing the things you once enjoyed, feel free to get creative. Ifarthritisin your knees keeps you fromrunningor playing basketball,swimmingor cycling might work for you.
You shouldn’t stop moving as you get older. Just move in a different way. Look for fitness programs at local senior centers or find a partner so you can motivate each other. If you have trouble finding time to be active, maybe a workout first thing in the morning, before you do anything else, can do the trick. Just make sure you eat somebreakfastfirst.
Talk to your doctor before you begin a new routine.
For some of us, it’s one of life’s little jokes: When you retire and don’t have to get up for work, you can’t seem tosleepin anymore.
But getting enough shut-eye is important. Most people need about 7 hours a night. If you’re not getting that much, for whatever reason, look for ways to adjust your nighttime routine.
Try not to drinkalcoholright before bedtime. While it might make you drowsy for a little while, it actually makes it harder to get a full night’s sleep.
You should also:
If you still can't get enough sleep, talk with your doctor.
For a few more ways to improve energy and mood as you age, you might:
Cut back onalcoholin general.As you age, its effects stay with you longer.
Drink morewater.If you're even a little dehydrated, it can sap your energy and affect your mood.
Cutstresswhere you can.For example, try to scale back your to-do list if you feel like you are spread too thin. Turn off the TV and take a walk if the news is making you anxious.
If you’retiredor depressed, talk to your doctor.Those things are not a normal part of aging. Another health problem may be to blame, likedepression,heart disease, orsleep apnea.
SOURCES:
CDC: “Preventing weight gain.”
Iowa High School Athletic Association: “Using the glycemic index to compare carbohydrates.”
National Institute on Aging: “Healthy Eating After 50.”
Government of British Columbia: “Alcohol and aging.”
Mayo Clinic: “7 benefits of regular physical activity.”
National Sleep Foundation: “Diet, Exercise and Sleep.”



© 2005 - 2024 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.See additional information.