Omega-3 fatty acids are polyunsaturated fats (or "healthy fats") you have to get from foods or supplements because your body doesn't make them. They're part of the support structure of every cell in your body; they give you energy; and they help keep your heart, lungs, blood vessels, and immune system working the way they should.

There are three main types of omega-3s:
Not only does your body need omega-3 fatty acids to function, it also gets tons of health benefits from them, including those that support your brain and heart.
Heart health
Some research shows that eating fish high in omega-3s may reduce your odds ofcardiovascular diseaseby lowering your cholesterol and triglycerides (fats in your blood). But taking fish oil supplements doesn't seem to have the same benefits. In fact, one large study ended early because fish oil supplements actually raised participants' chances of having atrial fibrillation, an irregular heartbeat that can cause a stroke.
Autoimmune diseases
Omega-3s in fish and fish oil supplements may help with symptoms of several autoimmune disease like rheumatoid arthritis, lupus, and Crohn's disease. But we need more research to understand how they work and if omegas-3s from fish are better than those in supplements.
Depression
Several clinical trials have studied how well omega-3s work in helping people who aren't getting relief from antidepressants. A meta-a-
+ nalysis of different studies found that omega-3s can help relieve some symptoms ofdepression. But more research is needed because some of the studies had mixed results.
Brain development in infancy
You need to get plenty of omega-3s while you're pregnant for your growing baby. It's important for their brain development and future thinking and reasoning skills.
Asthma in children
A diet high in omega-3s lowers a child's chances of having symptoms of asthma from indoor pollutants. Researchers suggest kids are better protected when they eat more foods with omega-3s and less of those with omega-6 fatty acids, like soybean and corn oils.
Symptoms of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
Research has found that children diagnosed withADHDhave low levels of omega-3 fatty acids in their blood, particularly DHA. Other research also shows that fish oil might improve the symptoms of ADHD in some children, but more research is needed and omega-3 supplements should not be used as a primary treatment.
Cognitive decline
Some research suggests that omega-3s may help protect against cognitive decline, Alzheimer's disease, and dementia and have a positive effect on gradual memory loss linked to aging. But studies suggest you get the most benefit when your diet is full of omega-3s before symptoms set in.
When possible, try to get your omega-3 fatty acids from foods rather than supplements.
Fish high in omega-3s
Aim to eat nonfried, oilyfishhigh in DHA and EPA at least two times a week. Here are several:
While eating more fatty fish is good, some are likely to have higher levels of mercury, polychlorinated biphenyls, or other toxins. These include bigeye tuna, mackerel, wild swordfish, tilefish, and shark.
Vegan sources of omega-3s
Bear in mind that oils and nuts can be high in calories, so eat them in moderation.
The National Institutes of Health suggests you eat about 1-1.5 grams of omega-3 fatty acids every day as part of a healthy diet. It's best if it comes from food rather than supplements. You can get more than enough from a 3-ounce filet of fresh salmon.
There isn't much research on the symptoms of omega-3 deficiency. Most focus, instead, on how omega-3s benefit your health.
But if you don't get enough omega-3s in your diet, you could have rough, scaly skin or a red, itchy rash.
Omega-3 deficiency isn't very common in the U.S.
Talk to your doctor first before you take any supplements. They may have specific recommendations or warnings, depending on your health and other medicines you take.
The FDA doesn't regulate supplements for effectiveness, and research showsfish oilsupplements don't help lower your chances or heart disease. But that doesn't mean they might not not help relieve symptoms of other conditions.
The most common side effects from fish oil are indigestion and gas.
Other side effects include:
Photo Credit:Generative AI by Getty Images
SOURCES:
American Heart Association: "Fish, Levels of Mercury and Omega-3 fatty acids."
Ronald Glick, MD, medical director, Center for Integrative Medicine, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center.
Erminia M. Guarneri, MD, cardiologist; founder, Scripps Center for Integrative Medicine, Scripps Health, La Jolla, CA; president, American Board of Integrative Holistic Medicine; founder, Guarneri Integrative Health at Pacific Pearl La Jolla; author,The Heart Speaks.
Harvard School of Public Health.
David C. Leopold, MD, director of integrative medical education, Scripps Center for Integrative Medicine, La Jolla, CA.
Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database Monograph: "Fish oil."
Natural Standard Patient Monograph: "Omega-3 fatty acids."
Gail Underbakke, RD, MS, nutrition coordinator, preventative cardiology program, University of Wisconsin Hospital and Clinics.
European Heart Journal: "Omega-3 fatty acids supplementation and risk of atrial fibrillation: an updated meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials."
NIH Office of Dietary Supplements: "Omega-3 Fatty Acids," "Omega-3 Supplements: In Depth."
Cleveland Clinic: "Omega-3 Fatty Acids."
Nutrition and Diabetes: "Comparison of the effect of omega-3 supplements and fresh fish on lipid profile: a randomized, open-labeled trial."
NEJM: "Cardiovascular Risk Reduction with Icosapent Ethyl for Hypertriglyceridemia."
Mediterranean Journal of Rheumatology: "The Effect of Omega-3 Fatty Acids on Rheumatoid Arthritis."
Autoimmunity Reviews: "Effect of omega-3 fatty acids on systemic lupus erythematosus disease activity: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
International Journal of Molecular Sciences: "Omega Fatty Acids and Inflammatory Bowel Diseases: An Overview."
Translation Psychiatry: "Efficacy of omega-3 PUFAs in depression: A meta-analysis."
Child Development: "Fish Oil Supplementation in Pregnancy and Neurodevelopment in Childhood-A Randomized Clinical Trial."
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine: "Omega-3 and Omega-6 Intake Modifies Asthma Severity and Response to Indoor Air Pollution in Children."
PLoS One: "Omega-3 and Omega-6 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid Levels and Correlations with Symptoms in Children with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, Autistic Spectrum Disorder and Typically Developing Controls."
Neuropsychopharmacology: "Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids in Youths with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: a Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Clinical Trials and Biological Studies."
European Journal of Nutrition: "Dietary and supplemental long-chain omega-3 fatty acids as moderators of cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease."
FDA: "Advice About Eating Fish."



© 2005 - 2024 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.See additional information.